Alright, well, uh, welcome to the Social Service
and Community Sleep Committee.
Um, thank you for being here this afternoon.
So, uh, so it's probably the, the normal, uh,
practice we have is just if you introduce yourselves, um,
and then take some time to, um, make some opening statements
and then we'll go from there to questions members.
Great. Um,
so I'm Aaron.
I'm the CE of the Independent Children's Monitor.
And on my right, please,
Helen.
I'm the, uh, chief Monitor at the a
And on my left Tyson,
I'm the General manager,
corporate strategy and Insights at al.
Thank you. Just in terms of introductory, um, remarks,
um, this was our second
and our final year as a departmental agency.
And it was one of consolidation things change.
Um, our monitoring of the whole
of the Ana TAM system culminated in the publication
of our first system wide report.
So previously our focus had been,
and our mandate was on, um, the quality of TAM HU in Care.
Um, last year we published our first system wide report,
which looked at the whole of the Ang Tamari system
for Tamari, uhhi, Maori, and au.
Um, and then the final stage of our evolution
as an organization was completed on the 1st of August, 2025,
when we became an independent Crown entity.
And it was always the voices, um,
of those in the system at the center of our work.
Um, and in that last financial year,
we heard from more than 1,200 TAM caregivers
and professionals who support them.
So over the now five years, we've heard from over 6,000,
um, individuals about their experience
of care in the wider system.
Um, our outcomes from Maori report that I mentioned
before was our first of these reports,
and they will be delivered annually
as required by our legislation.
Um, a significant milestone in doing this.
Um, and in developing the report, we worked, um,
and received guidance from our Maori advisory group to kahu
as well as from Iwi, including strategic partners.
Um, as it was important that we, uh,
focused on the most important data
and information that we could to help influence change.
We also partnered with the Social Investment Agency, um,
seconded their staff to enable us to access data
that sat in the stats IDI so
that we could tell outcome measures for both, um,
Ranta at the age of 18, but then also young adults.
Um, and by putting those markers in place
and returning to them, we hope to see success in terms
of improved outcomes for young people
that are involved in the system.
Um, in February, 2025, um,
we published our fourth experiences of care report in roa,
and we are in the process of finalizing our fifth, um,
these care standards took effect in 2019.
And the lack of progress in complying with these, um,
highlighted by our 2025 report, um, led to the introduction
of a change to the oversight
of the Tamaki System Amendment Act, oh, sorry.
ACT. And the amendment bill brought in a requirement
that agencies now have to update their ministers
after four months of publication of
that report on progress they're making
with compliance and those standards.
Um, we also, in August 24, we published our review
of the implementation of the recommendations
that Dan Karin Potassium made following the death
of Young Malachi.
Um, and our report was, um,
more than 18 months on from that report.
And unfortunately, as I've probably spoken
to you in the past, the conclusion was that at
that time, children were no safer.
Um, because none of the recommendations had been acted upon
apart from one, um, which was us to come back
and review progress against those recommendations.
Um, we are now in the process
of completing our second report, uh,
following up on those recommendations.
Um, and it was through the drafting of that process
that government has, um, now accepted all
of Dame Karin's recommendations.
Um, and we are just waiting on, um, updates in terms
of further advice that is going to cabinet on implementation
of those recommendations so
that we can include them in our report.
Um, and that report will be published, um,
in February three.
Um, alongside those national-wide reports, we continue
to influence, um, change one community at a time.
Um, after each of our community monitoring visits,
we share back what we heard.
Um, our community share back is
provided to government agencies as well as iwi Maori
and community organizations that we meet with.
And they're published on our websites.
Um, these share backs are well received.
We survey attendees, um,
and 89% of survey respondents saying it is useful in terms
of their work, um, for us to, um, share back to them.
And 59% telling us they've already made
or plan to make changes
as a result of our monitoring visits.
Some of these changes include collaborating better
with other organizations, listening to Ranga Tahi voice
reducing silos and prioritizing training.
And then finally, um, in terms of the oversight system, um,
together with Una, um, the Children's Commissioner
and the Ombudsman, we've continued to promote understanding
of the oversight of the system
and collaborate on issues of importance.
Um, as an organization, our own organization,
we have a culture of continuous improvement, um,
whether it is in our monitoring practice, how we share back,
how we analyze information or how we deliver our reports.
Um, and, um, for the organization, um,
the recent public service, um, census demonstrated
that we're an organization
that are highly engaged in its purpose, innovative,
collaborative, respectful,
and I wanna thank all for their caring commitment they've
shown over the year, um, to improving the lives
of young people that are in the system.
Great, thank you. Uh, first Christian will,
Um, the first thing I wanted to pick up on was, um,
in the annual report where we have, uh,
a performance measure, which is all agencies who are subject
of a final report make commitments
to implement changes based on our report findings.
And the note there was that it was not achieved.
Um, and it mentioned one agency, which agency was that?
Um, it's actually not a government agency,
but a, um, community provider.
So, um, have one young person in their care.
Um, and so then it was new to this copa, um,
and so they hadn't come back to us with their action plan,
so we followed up with them now.
But that's why that's in the, in the report,
What the, what? Oh,
that reference haven't back achieved,
but you've taken steps on that and that's, that's
Right. And in, and in
this year's report, obviously we speak to,
um, the quality of care that they're providing
and the steps that they've taken to improve as well. So
Thank you.
Do you want, did you wanna follow up on that one?
Um, I am interested in, um,
Gloria Veil and the mass allegation.
Uh, I asked written questions earlier this year
and was very concerned with the high number of reports
of concern, um, and visits.
Um, is that something that your view
and your team are, um,
involved in looking into not just the mass allegations,
but actually Yeah,
In terms of Gloria Vale?
So our recent visit
to the Canterbury region includes the West Coast.
Um, we considered whether there was, um, it was right
to go in and speak with, um, those
that are in Gloria Vale At the time, we made the decision
that there was a number of agencies that were engaged
and for us to go in there would add further, um,
I wouldn't say confusion, but would
overload in terms of what was happening.
What we have done instead is made sure
that we're getting briefings from Ang Tamari in terms
of the progress and what is happening from a cross agency
perspective to make sure that the young people are
cared for in the right way.
And we continue to get those updates from Ang Tamari.
Um, as an oversight group, we are considering about
who is best placed to respond if and when needed.
Um, obviously not all
of the young people in Gloria Vale would be in
the Ang Tamari system.
Certainly some of the services that are
provided to those young people also would sit outside
because they're not contracted through the government.
Um, the sense is that the Ombudsman's office
with their investigative powers would probably be the right,
um, part of the oversight system
to go in if they were needed.
But at this pa at this stage, we're keeping, um, track of
what agencies are doing and we'll make a decision if
and when we need to do more.
Any question? Oh, thank you.
Um, so what were the reasons that
monitoring visit was not completed within
that reporting year?
And what confidence can the committee have that future
regional monitoring will remain on schedule, um,
given the monitors statutory requirements
and community based processes?
Thank you. Um, the, the visit was completed, um,
in the end, pleased to say just didn't complete,
but the one part of the, um, the visit
that didn't fit within the annual
within the year was actually the share back hui, so the Hui
that we have and bring everyone together, uh, to present,
um, the share back report
and then to enable that conversation about this is what's
occurring, what are you collectively
going to do to try and improve?
So that was the path that hadn't been completed.
So, and it was about a scheduling, um, uh,
issue we had a lot of other things on
and trying to fit it in with that.
Yeah. And we are constantly looking at the way
that we schedule our visits in
to make sure this doesn't happen again.
Mm-hmm. Um, it certainly isn't what we'd like to see, so.
Awesome. So it was mainly to do with just the capacity
of the community rather than resource issues.
A little bit on our side too.
It was about making sure that we could schedule
that Hui at the right time.
Sure. Um, and probably on our side, completing the,
she reports we had a number of reports at that time,
so it was a bit of a sequencing problem.
So we need to do better on that
to make sure they all occur in the,
in the financial year, in the future.
Thank you. Does the Monitor
consider the current funding level sufficient, um,
to complete those high quality regional monitoring, um,
that, that monitoring across those 10
regions every three years?
Good question. Um, the, the, the thing with monitoring is,
like I mentioned, we've spoken to over 6,000 people.
Um, the question becomes one of, uh, do you need to speak
to more or have you got the message
and have you developed the insights?
And I think one
of the things we've noted over the five years is we're
seeing a lot that's the same.
And unfortunately not a lot
that's necessarily changing, right.
And we are seeing some new initiatives that are coming that,
that show some promise,
but largely it's just been fairly consistent.
We, in the new year, we are having a strategic, um, session
with Thu and, um, our board to think about what's next
for us and how do we make the best use of our resources.
Mm. Because part of the challenge is there's so much
that we could go and look at, um,
aside from those annual reports, we do deep dives, um,
you know, going into education, uh,
deep dives into mental health.
We're currently working one on about engagements with sports
and recreation, but there's so much that we could do.
It's about how do we prioritize it
and make sure that we are delivering the best value in terms
of what will influence positive change
to the greatest degree.
And so we're constantly trying to think of that.
And of course, you could always do more if you had more.
And so how do you manage those risks?
It, it does sound very complex
and, um, that there's a lot of roads that you could go down.
So how do you manage those risks, um, in ensuring
that you are monitoring those, um, high need regions
or areas around the country? Yeah,
I think, um, attached to that, so like I mentioned
before, we get around the matsu every three years,
so we won't be going back Totoro for three years.
We're now thinking, well, is that not,
maybe that's not the right approach.
While you may not do a monitoring visit every three years,
we may go back every year and saying, okay, we saw you.
What progress have you made
on the plans that you've developed?
And use that as a way of trying to drive and,
and help influence some change.
Mm-hmm. Um, yeah. Look, it, it's, it's a challenge.
I think the thing that maybe we are learning
through the last four years, we could go
and look to look at lots of different things
and produce lots of different reports.
But is that actually the thing that is helpful?
What I've learned from, um, the Potass report perhaps
is it's the coming back a second time.
And so we may look at a particular issue once knowing
that we need to come back again in two years time.
So rather than spreading yourself, you actually go narrow
and you really hit home on what's most important.
Mm-hmm. So when we think about potass, it's really a,
an issue around the front door,
which is a critical importance.
Mm-hmm. And so rather than taking our eye off that,
and now this will be our second report,
we are thinking we need to come back again,
but look at slightly more broadly about the front door.
What changes are occurring as a result
of the recent decisions that government has made?
Are they making a difference? And what else is needed?
And so these are the things that we're sort of, um,
thinking about in terms of our strategy,
Not even, oh, just the you, the show Promise one,
you said some was showing Promise one was Yeah, yeah.
Can you just tell us
About that? Yeah. Which
one's that Yeah, that's, we wanna hear
There's Clues in that I know, well, actually in, in all
of our, um, community share backs, um, we talk
to initiatives that we hear
are showing signs of success.
And I've just, we've just been meeting with D Kahui
and you know, the answer lies in community.
A lot of those initiatives are ones
that are community based.
Um, so an example would be, um, and I've mentioned this
before, um, in terms of up in whakatane with awa, um,
the work they're doing in creating a different
front door into the system.
So their commitment that for every report of concern
that comes in, they have their own contact center.
Effectively, they are ensuring that every whanau is visited,
not just making a risk assessment about
what requires ang tamari statutory involvement.
But for the majority of reports, a concern are about AU
that need help young people that need help,
they are committing to going
and seeing them, engaging with those families, hoping
to give them help, but if actually a statutory response is
required, ensuring that ang tamari there as well.
So that's, we will talk to that in our, in our current
report, is a way forward because without being a spoiler
alert, the work that's being done
to help identify children in the system is really important.
That need help and need to be kept safe.
Unless you fix the way that the wider system responds,
you're not going to see the
improvement that you're hoping for.
You are just gonna have more kids
that are known that need help.
And so a lot of effort needs to be placed in the response.
And this is where initiatives like up at Nati,
where you have a strong community focus,
a two tiered response system,
where you have a community response
for those at the lower end to help them
and prevent those cases from, I shouldn't say cases,
but those whanau from escalating early intervention
investment approach
and then having Wang Tamari just at this statutory end.
That is the sign of hope and success, I think. Thank
You.
So that sounds fascinating.
What kinds of things, uh, um, is
that community doing at that early intervention level, um,
in that particular, 'cause you've seen it.
We haven't. Yeah, sorry. Yeah.
What are they doing differently?
Well, I think there's kind of two, uh,
maybe two different types of approach.
Either go top down in terms
of government agencies deliver services
and support in the way that they think they're needed.
And there's certainly a place for that, right?
So you are talking about things like funding,
parenting programs, drug
and alcohol rehabilitation programs, um,
putting in place mentoring programs for young people.
All of that is really good. But also you need to combine
that with more of a whanau aura approach
where you actually listen to what is the wau need.
And it could be a plethora of things
and the solution may not be
what you think it would be. Yeah.
Can you give me, I I'll
Give you, I'll give you a great example. This
is one that sticks with me.
'cause it was, when I first started in this job,
we were down in, um, or Tahi and talking to Tipa
and talking about in white
and a family that had everything you can imagine in terms
of indicators of harm.
When you asked them what they needed help first
was paint the fence, can we paint the fence?
So they provided the paint, came along
and helped them paint the fence.
And why was it important to paint the fence when you had all
these other issues that were going on in the family?
It was because they felt ashamed when
people walked past their home.
So the first step was you paint the fence,
make them feel proud.
Yeah. And also build that connection with the people
that are helping you to then go on
and do the other things that they need as well.
So it's that first step and
that's why the solution isn't always
what the problem presents as.
Mm-hmm. So it's a combination of those things.
Oh, thank you. So with your recommendations,
um, do you, does the monitor have any formal ability
To, I get, um, make sure that organizations
or agencies are complying?
Or is it more like the soft pressure
or, um, ministerial oversight which gets that compliance?
So that, that, that question of
how do you influence change
or how do you increase the accountability is a challenge
that's shared not by us,
but by other similar, um, commissioners
or institutions around the world.
So again, agencies aren't accountable to us,
they're accountable to their ministers.
Mm. We don't make, we haven't yet made recommendations.
We make findings. Um,
and the rationale behind that,
as we don't think it's helpful to tell agencies what to do,
what we think is important is we provide insights
that might suggest what you are doing
is working or it's not.
And for them to help them develop their work programs
to respond to our findings.
Because our secret source, the thing
that we do have is that we come back,
and this is what I mentioned earlier, is that I'm starting
to see it's the coming back that perhaps starts to, um,
drive some of the change.
And so it's the coming back.
So agencies are required to tell us what they will do.
We come back and say, did you do the thing?
And this is what's happening in the community as a result.
Is it making a difference?
And also in your own data in terms of performance,
is that starting to shift?
So, um, so there's two things here where you've got, um,
the reporting requirements of certain agencies,
organizations, and non-compliance of that is followed up.
Um, and, and, and you guys put that way.
And then there's this other part of it,
which is the findings that you have.
Um, and, you know, ensuring that work is,
is actually been started.
And then obviously, you know, following up on that, um,
on a regular basis.
So do you, do you track that non-compliance?
Well, I think, um, 'cause the only compliance, well,
we do look at it in terms of the wider ang act
and how the police and TKI work to those.
The most obvious case of compliance is those care standards.
Mm-hmm. You know, their minimum standards,
their legal requirements in terms of quality of care mm-hmm.
And they're not being met.
And so in terms of following up every year we are going back
to see whether those care standards are being complied with.
Gotcha. And to date, we are not seeing the progress,
although Ang tamari are very hopeful that
by next year we may have started to see an improvement.
And partly that is because this is the first time
I've seen a really specific action plan focused on
how you're going to improve compliance
with those standards from
A question, Maureen.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, we've,
we've had OT in, um, the
Committee this morning
and they've highlighted in some detail the, um, the changes
that they're anticipating in terms of contracting
for providers, including the performance objectives they've
got and the outcomes they want to achieve.
So in terms of the work that you do, where,
where is the alignment or the overlap
or the conflict with, with where they're heading
and with where what you are doing? Yeah.
I there's not a, there's not a conflict that's,
that's the direction of travel it was.
Or, or Yeah, that's right.
And, and that's the direction of travel. Right.
And I think, um, there's a lot in that. That makes sense.
A lot of it is fundamental basic.
And we talked about this with, um,
the children's commission with you in the past.
Um, we, what our role is, is
to then go and see what is changing.
So if you're shifting the way that you're contracting
to multi-year contracts, going to an outcome based model,
we'll be interested to see if that's making a difference in
terms of the experience for young people
and ultimately their outcomes.
Because that's ultimately the thing that's most important.
Are their lives getting better?
The challenge for, for commissioning
is how do you show that direct link between
what you're commissioning and the outcome?
Because people's lives are complicated.
There's a lot going on. Mm-hmm.
But certainly more can be done.
And this is why having social investment agency involved
to try and provide more data information will be helpful.
But equally you need to listen to the voices of,
of whanau young people that are receiving the services
because what they tell you is incredibly important.
And that should guide your commissioning as much
as it is about thinking about
commissioning models and frameworks.
Mm. I just assume that, so That's exactly right.
And it's what we heard this morning as well.
So, you know, I just, I just have a concern
that we've got two different agencies doing very,
or heading in the same direction to do similar work
In terms of social investment agency and Ang tamari or,
Or, or, or, or you guys because, um, yeah.
'cause they're, they're heading in the same direction
where they're saying that, um, you know, those agencies have
to be driven, you know, the outcomes are driven
by the families and the young people in their care.
Um, and, and you've done similar work and,
and, um, provided feedback about
That. Yeah. Well I think the roles
are complimentary, right?
So we're a feedback loop for any direction of travel
or any change they make.
And so we encourage Ang Education Health to rely on our work
as a way of testing whether the changes you're
making are actually effective.
So we are complementing what they do, irrespective of
what their strategy will be.
We are here to provide feedback on whether it's
being successful or not.
I've got, um, I think it's a supplementary on
this is mm-hmm.
Basically, so you've got the pieces of work, which doing
what social investment agencies Yeah.
Doing and they working together
and using the IDO to some degree to inform some
of their, their work.
And you obviously have the, um, different community
agencies, iwi partners, um, helping, et cetera, et cetera.
Um, so there's, there's a lot
of different parts at play here.
You are trying to sort of have a system wide lens, I think,
perspective on what's going on and try
and, like you say, provide a feedback loop.
Yeah. In terms of feedback loop to our committee,
what are you seeing in terms of effective cross agency cross
grouping work that's going on that's, that's,
that is working well from what you're seeing?
Um, And, and why, if there's
An example. Yeah,
what I would, you know, I think our,
our last year's care report, we were quite strong in terms
of our key finding.
One was finding ways
to enable good social work practice as part of the solution.
But the other part of the solution in terms of quality
of care was breaking down silos and funding silos.
So this isn't a story of success unfortunately,
but it's one of where we think the focus needs to go.
So you have funding sitting in multiple buckets
and you have multiple buckets within ARI.
And what that then requires is for the caregiver
or the family to try and negotiate
and find how to get the system to work
for them rather than working for them.
So what we see still in communities is
arguments over who will fund.
It's not should we fund time spent arguing about
who will fund and this delays the delivery of services
if they occur at all.
And so where agencies need to collaborate is
to actually break down some of that siloed thinking.
Part of the challenge we are seeing is even in collaborative
practice in communities, more recently we are seeing a
pulling back away from resourcing collaborative work
because agencies are pulling back to what they consider
to be core business because
of funding pressures on the agencies.
Unfortunately, what we need to change in New Zealand is
to see collaborative working as core business.
That is how we work and it needs to be prioritized because
otherwise we retreat into our parts.
When I say we, I'm talking about the public service.
When we deliver our part in isolation of the other bits,
and this is a story that's been told for a long time
and we haven't cracked it yet.
So, you know, there may be some um, um,
green shoots in terms of the work that's happening
around the dam car and Potass recommendations in terms
of setting up hubs with multi agencies.
But we have tried this
before, so how do we make sure that it sticks?
But it's not just collaboration between government agencies.
They actually need to think more about
how do they collaborate with communities.
Like I said before, the solution actually sits in the
community and while government thinks they can develop the
answers, they're not gonna be able to deliver it
unless they have the communities involved with them.
So the social investment agency is, in my understanding,
is exactly working on exactly that.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. But are you saying that's not working?
Oh, I don't think, I'm not gonna,
um, pass judgment on that.
I'm not saying it's not working
'cause they're in the right direction.
What I'm commenting on here is
what we're seeing currently is that there's a way to go,
I think some of the things that social investment agency are
doing in terms of, um, rationalizing contracts.
So you don't have a plethora
of contracts going into one provider.
That's all good stuff that's been asked for a long time.
So it'll be really interested to see what difference
that makes in terms of delivery
and experience of those that again, the services, I think,
um, the fund that they've set up in terms of um, looking
for innovative ways of delivering services
to whanau in particular areas is good.
And if they can bring a greater level of understanding
and insights into whether those services are actually
delivering and improving, that will be a huge improvement
because they're able to pull on information
that individual agencies alone can't do.
Yeah.
Any question? Um, sorry,
I'm changing my question as we might
Have been. Last question too actually.
Um, I, we, we had, um,
I'm really interested in the, the, what you can contribute
to us understanding that system better
and that community stuff.
I think that's, that's really interesting.
But we had, um, even here, um,
last year talking about the issues at ot.
Mm-hmm. And we got told, um,
we've been told a lot more today,
but we were told at that time we're sort
of waiting on the social investment agency.
And then we have heard, um, yesterday when we were talking
to them questioning around whether people were sort of
held up in terms of delivering
'cause they were waiting for the agency
to lead in terms of which way.
Yeah. And then today we heard, um,
a discussion about that, the setting of,
of the priorities by the agency.
Um, I got concerned about, well,
who's watching the priorities?
Because we also had a huge discussion about bootcamps. Mm.
And um, it was a priority set almost against any
economic advantage.
So what role do you see you have
in watching that those priorities are evidence-based,
that they're not also just low hanging fruit mm-hmm.
That they're long term. Mm-hmm.
I, um, what with, um,
social investment agency now just starting up this
commissioning in the work, part of our role will be
to be monitoring them
because they are part of the wider ang tamari system
because they're contracting for services that are delivered
to young people that are known to ang tamari.
Mm-hmm. So we have a role exactly as you've described,
to talk about what it is that they're doing
and is there strategy, responding to the needs
that we are seeing through our work in the
communities and also in the data.
So yes, we'll have a role on that too. Alright.
Thank you. Oh, last question, last last question.
Are you sure? Mm-hmm. Um, it just focused on some
of your discussion.
I think it was funding and then you said multiple buckets.
I go, yeah, I flick back to my days and then, um,
and then who will fund?
And that that whole it's, it's it's you, it's not us.
And the delay in that delay of services, you said? Yeah.
And I was like, oh geez, this,
now I'm getting depressed because mm-hmm.
The prior discussion was actually quite upbeat I thought.
I know. And I, um, I didn't feel that the last time,
but I did just prior.
'cause I, from what I'm hearing,
it sounded like things were, um,
but just, I'm not saying you're damning at all,
but I, I'm just picking up on those things
'cause they, they are crucial things.
A and um, I I just,
and then you said, um, these issues have been around
for a long time and I just think, geez.
So is the, is the matter of urgency understood?
Is that when we say it's happened, it's been happening
for a long time, it's as if we can tolerate more time
and yet children are caught in the tune of all of it.
Just do we get that how urgent this is and
therefore how brave would it take?
What what would it take to actually blow it,
blow something out and go, go now go big and go early.
Yeah. I think probably
what you'd hear from Ang Tamari there probably is
there is a focus on this now and, and yeah.
And that is hopeful. Um,
but it is, um, it's a fundamental problem.
And I think when you think about the Ang Tamari Act itself,
um, the chief executive has an obligation to care
for Tamari and his kids.
Yes. Um, he can rely on services from other government
agencies and hope that they step up
and prioritize the delivery of those services for these kids
for the very reasons that we know.
However, the act also says if he's unable
to actually access those services,
that there's an obligation on him to pay for them.
And that's a challenging position to sit in. Boy.
And perhaps we need greater clarity in terms
of the obligations that sit on other agencies
to prioritize these kids.
Because until that happens, yes,
maybe we won't necessarily see
the progress that we all want.
And equally, if you think about the key standards,
those are standards that are all placed quite rightly on Ang
Tamari as the de facto parent quite right.
But there aren't obligations on education and health
and others to also deliver to young people that are in care.
Mm. And perhaps that's something that needs to change too,
to try and cut through some of the issues
that are being faced at the moment.
Well thanks. You left us on
an interesting point to contemplate.
Um, thank, thank you for time. This a very much.